Four years since I have taught. Yes. And I love it.
Yes. It's just one of those things. Well, you know,
I love, to me, the second graders were my, was my pet
group. I love them children. Full of, full of
questions. Full of, I mean, everything is new to
them. They want to hear everything. And they need
you so badly. You're faster the first year when
they're so immature. and when they asked for their
mother so desperately. We had a very, very crucial
situation at Montrose because of lack of space,
which is always the case. Was this school in a
poorer district of the Grado? Yes, yes. It was in a
poorer district. We had some children of very high
Income. But scarcely one, two, three, four. Just,
you could count them in your fingers. But first
grades, I remember when I was a principal, first
graders were always crying. Always crying. And
there was a little girl who cried every day, so I
told the teacher, you bring it to me. And I told her,
now look, you've never used a telephone? No. I
said, all right, from now on you're going to answer
the phone for me. And so she would pick up the
receipt and say, Monroe School. She would say,
Monroe School. Little things like that. And you
know, that finally gave her the security that she
was just not being thrown in there and forgotten.
And I insisted, I even asked, I said, well, why? To
me, I thought, if first graders, if a school as
crowded as we are, could rent a house nearby and
give the children the atmosphere of home rather
than of school while they get used to it, I think
they would do better. But of course those were
dreams that I had. I had many dreams.
I don't think of first graders, at least in my
children's experience, as being particularly
unhappy. I'm sure there are adjustments. They
were not unhappy, except for my daughter. My
children always attended a private school the
first years. They went to Mrs. Ellis, and she was a
wonderful teacher. So they did first and second
grade, or first grade at least. Then from there on,
they would put them in the public schools. But not
my daughter. She went to Ersinine. which is run by
nuns. And Mariangela started getting sick, and
she was sick. And every day they would call me at
Montrose and say, Mariangela is sick. So I would
ask Mr. Barris, he said, all right. Of course, I was
in the office. If I go pick her up, yes, go right
ahead. So I'd come and pick her up and bring her
home. Or she would, she even walked to my sister's,
which was about five blocks. And I said, I'm going
to get to the bottom of this. There's something.
There definitely is something, because she would
actually get sick. The nun, the sister who was
teaching her the first half year, was fine. But
there was a sister, Ana Maria, who was a great big,
and she had a heart of gold. But she was very big,
very tall, dressed in black, And the girls, the
older girls, made her think that Sister Ana Maria
was very, very mean. And if her teacher would walk
out of the room, the older girls knew what would
scare her. So they told her, Sister Ana Maria is
going to take our class. And that just petrified
her. I really had to search. and get to the bottom of
it. And so I decided, I went to the sisters and I told
them what my problem was. And I said, I want you,
would you please, would you consider coming over
to the house, and it was during more or less around
Christmas time, and let Maria Angela show you the
Christmas tree and the,
we always put the nacimiento.
And I told Maria Angela, we're going to have
guests. You know who's coming? Sister Cornelius,
I believe that was her name. Sister, I can't
remember the other one. And Sister Ana Maria. And I
said, yes, she's coming to see us. And so they came.
And they sat in our living room over there. And
Sister Ana Maria held her little hand, which I'm
sure was like a piece of ice. She was frozen. She
realized that Sister Ana Maria was just a big
woman. But she wasn't going to hurt anybody. And
she finished high school. She went to a whole
school there. Then she went to Incarnate Work
College. And then during her senior year, when she
lacked, oh I'd say about a semester and maybe a
summer. She decided she wanted to get married.
We tried to talk sense into her, but no, she
wouldn't have it any other way. My son-in-law,
whom I'm very happy that she married, was in the
Army. In fact, he still is in the Army. Is he from
here? No, he is from Canada, but his family came to
Florida. Then Bob became an American citizen and
as soon as he was out of college, he was drafted. And
he went into the Army and he met Maria Angela in San
Antonio. He was in Kellyfield, I think. Yeah,
Kellyfield is Army. And that's where he met her and
that's where they met and then he was transferred
to the state of Washington.
And that's when they decided they wanted to get
married. So my husband said, well, go to San
Antonio and see if you can convince her. I said, no,
I can't. Couldn't do it. So we came home and she got
married in a big hurry and left for Washington and
then came back. And then Bob was sent to Vietnam.
And those were very trying days for her. I know they
were. And her baby was born while he was in Vietnam.
Mary Catherine was born while my husband was in
Korea. Is that right? Mm-hmm. The war was not going
on at the time, but 13 months separation is very
bad. Very bad. Anyway. And so that was it. And then
he came... Oh, he was... He's two years old.
Mm-hmm. So he... decided that he was going to do
something else. And he found a position, or John,
if you want to call it, with IBM in Houston. Well, my
second son lived and still lives in Houston, and
he'll always be there. He's a psychiatrist. Oh,
really? He is.
She thought that the fact that her brother was
there would make it easier for her. In fact, they
found an apartment in the same complex where he was
living. But naturally, he was going out all the
time. And they had absolutely no social life. She
didn't know who lived next door. Houston is a
tremendously big city. It's very big. Much too big
for me. It's much too big for most people. So we went
to spend Thanksgiving with them and Renata, my
husband, came home and said, now I'm really,
really broken hearted to see the way our daughter
lives. Her home is very well kept and a very nice
apartment. Everything was perfect. But she had
nothing to do except wait for Bob to come home in the
evening, eat, and go to bed. And that was it. Monday
through Friday. No hail, which she was used to. So
anyway, they decided they were going back into the
Army. And she wrote to him. No, she called long
distance. They were having a party. And a friend of
mine, Hazel Skinner, answered the phone and says,
Miss Skinner, what are you doing at Mother's? Oh,
we're having a good time. Your mother's having a
cocktail party. We're all having a good time. So
they visited for a little while, and then Jesus
says, Angela, it's for you. It's Maria. So I went
and answered the phone. I said, well, hello,
honey. So glad you're calling. Anything wrong?
No, mother, nothing. There's nothing wrong. So
next morning, the phone rings, and it was Jesus.
Angela, call Maria. The reason she called you last
night was because God has joined the army again.
And she wanted to tell you, but she knew that You
would be upset by it, so she didn't want to tell you
that. So, because I had already told them that it
was so ridiculous for them to go get right back into
the lion's mouth and this and the other, and they
would always live like gypsies with not having a
home. I tried to make it as dark as I possibly could.
But she says, Mother, you taught me that whatever
made Daddy happy would make you happy. So he was
sent to El Paso, which was fine. We visited with
him. And then from El Paso,
he was sent to Tokyo. And she's with him in Tokyo?
No, no, no. She's here now. They lived in Tokyo for
three years. Her baby was born, her second child
was born in Tokyo. And we visited them. Well, there
was an alliance convention, national
convention, and it was in the Orient, so we went. Of
course, my main attraction was going to Tokyo to
see her, and she was very, very upset about leaving
us again, and she wrote very interesting letters
from Tokyo. In fact, I say them all, and I told her,
someday you might be able to do something, because
she has a
tremendous...
I guess it's something inborn with her, in her
riding. Well, these experiences and the travel
perhaps will be good, because this will develop
her ability to ride. Yes, I'm sure. But anyway...
After the three years in Tokyo, they sent them to
San Antonio, which was wonderful. Oh, yeah. In San
Antonio, they were going to be there six months.
And then from there, Bob went back to Vietnam. So
when he went to Vietnam, he came back to Laredo. And
they live in a house that belongs to us. Could I
offer you some fruit juice or something? Oh, that
would be very nice. Would you care for some?
Mr. Bonnie Leyendecker, who was a very close
friend of my grandfather. And so Daddy was trying
to find something. So he went to Mr. Leyendecker
and said, I don't have nothing to offer.
Absolutely nothing to offer. The only thing that I
could tell you would be that you could kind of watch
over my cotton pickers. And Daddy said, all right,
I'll do it. And when he'd come home, my grandmother
was just crying. To see her own son, I mean her
child, have to do that kind of a work just to
survive. Because actually that's what he was
trying to do, keep us from going hungry. So they
would do anything. And I believe that if they would
If they would have told him, the only thing there is
for you to do is pick cotton, he would say, all
right, I'll do it. Maybe he wouldn't have picked,
but...
Well, there were, in fact, I guess two, well, one
very wealthy family that I've talked to in El Paso
was never able to recover, really. And then some
who were poorer in Mexico have done quite well. So
there's been a lot of variation. But just the fact
that people have represented every faction of the
revolution, the winners and the losers, I think
this... Well, there was one thing that, in my
opinion, was a great salvation to our family. And
that was the fact that, as I told you, both
societies, the Nuevo Laredo and Laredo, lived as
one. Daddy would come to the, well the people from
this side would go to the casino and all that. And
Daddy was everybody's friend. And by the same
token he would come to dances on this side with the
best of people. So you already had contact. Oh yes,
everybody knew him. And so we didn't have anything
But we still were who we were. And this can make
quite a difference. Well, this is so important, I
think, in Mexico, much more so than it is in the
United States. Your name, who you were. It didn't
really matter what you had. It was who you were, you
know. This is true in some parts of the United
States, too. New Orleans is a classic example. And
a lot of the little towns. My mother's family
founded a little town in southeast Missouri. And
there's very definitely this who you are. But it's
not thought of in connection with the United
States. But you know, in my case, it didn't bother
me to know that my friends, who are the best girls
here, had better clothes than I did. Well, we
couldn't afford them, and that was all there was to
it. But nobody dressed to the point where you felt
very much inferior. In other words, there was not
that crazy spending that has taken us over. Well,
if you're sure enough of your status, there's no
need for this kind of display. Because I remember a
very, very dear friend of mine, Alice, she used to
sometimes come home and she would cry and say, you
know what, I don't think Daddy loves me at all. They
gave me sisters. There were three girls.
Virginia, Esther, and Alice. And the middle one
was sister. They always would stick on her sister.
There are two things that I want to ask you about
that I've been trying. I hope I can answer. Oh, I'm
sure you can. The first one relates to your
teaching. And I guess it's a little off the
subject, but I know growing up myself, society
where I was supposed to get married and stay home
and keep house. And this was just the only, I was to
go to college, but that was to be an educated
mother. And I know that my parents and my husband's
parents were both somewhat disapproving of me
being what I became. Now, did you have any, with
your career, did you face any of this? You mean the
fact that you were getting married and yet having
to keep on? Well, that you were working, that you
had a career, even though you were married and had
children. Did you have any? Did people ever accuse
you of being improper? Yes, I'll tell you. I'll
never forget one time. that a friend of mine, I had a
party for somebody, and this very, very dear
friend of mine who was also a teacher, Cecilia, and
this other friend says, oh, some of my friends call
me Angelita. Angelita's house is so pretty, her
home is so pretty, but you know, it's a shame
because of course she doesn't enjoy having to
teach. And so my friend jumped at her and says,
well, you'd be surprised how much she enjoys it.
And one thing I can tell you, her children are not
neglected in any way because of the fact that she
teaches. But I've always said this. You know, when
I got married and started teaching, they said,
poor Angela. She has to keep on working. And now,
girls get married. And they say, isn't it
wonderful? She's going to keep on teaching. Yes,
it's changed a lot. Even since, I think, even in 10
or 12 years. They used to feel sorry for us, and now
we think, isn't it wonderful? She still can teach.
You know, another thing that makes it different
here is the fact that we have helped so readily with
everything. That would make it different. It
makes it very different because you're able to
leave your house. Yeah, I had a maid. who raised my
children, we kept her for seventeen years. And if
you had something else, you always had two. I
always had two. One was absolutely dedicated to
the children. Walked them to school. You remember
that Cata used to walk you to Miss Ellis? She and
Blackie and Mariangela.
And she'd go pick her up because our hours didn't
coincide. But you weren't really here under
strong social pressures, not because it was an
improper thing to do. This is interesting,
because actually I experienced some of that
earlier. What was the other question? The other
question was, how did you happen to meet your
husband?
As we say in Spanish, lo conocí en un baile.
Well, she knows what that means. Yeah, but you did.
And yes, and actually I did. But of course, mother
took us to the dance. Uh-huh. And your daddy came,
and then who would I dance with? Yes, yes. Because
mother was keeping an eye on me. And I think your
daddy was chewing gum. Was he really? And my mother
disapproved terribly. She says, who was that? gum
chore that I was dancing with. Really? And, well,
we started going. Daddy never knew. Oh, I couldn't
have, nobody could come to my house and, I mean,
nobody could ask me for a date. Because... When you
were telling me about your schooling, I thought he
was probably rather strict. Very, very much so. In
fact, I think, not I think, I know he overdid it. But
that was the way he believed, and I don't know, that
we had to accept it. How did you manage then to?
Well, we kept on going together for several years,
and then when Mother died, I couldn't see him
because we were in mourning, and I didn't want to go
anyplace. And so a man of ours who came to spend some
weeks, some days with us, I told her, I said, Tia
Lolita, Renato wants to come and see me, and I don't
know what to do. She said, well, you two and your
father, well, he wants to talk to Daddy. So I told
Daddy, I said, Daddy, he already knew. Renato
wants to talk to you. He says, I have nothing to talk
to him about. I said, well, Daddy, he wants to talk
to you because he wants to ask permission to come
and see me here. He says, well, no, I don't want to
talk to him. I said, all right, then I have to. I'd
have to see him on the corner. That was the first
time that I ever said anything that I knew would
kind of be disrespectful. And so that evening he
came home, and he didn't tell me. He told Tia Lolita
to tell me, to tell Renato that it was all right. He
could come see me twice a week. So you became
novios. Yeah, yeah. We already were novios. But
this was official? Yes. And then Daddy went to work
in Mexico. Business got bad and he went to the state
of Guerrero. He was a very close friend of the
governor of Guerrero at that time. And I remember
so distinctly that I had gone to school in the
evening. to the Escuela Amarilla Central School
because I was taking one of those extension
courses. And Renato met me on the way, and he gave me
a letter. He said, I want you to read this. He had
written Daddy asking me for my hand. And so Daddy
wrote me and asked me, I mean, did I love him enough
to want to marry him? And of course, I said, yes. He
came over for the wedding. And then we went on a
short honeymoon to Monterey. And Daddy was so
jealous. I remember when I was getting dressed, a
lady friend of ours says, doesn't she look pretty
in her wedding gown? And Daddy says, I liked her
better without
it. Did he really? What year was it that you
married? We were married in... In 1934. What sort
of work was your father doing in Guerrero? I don't
know. He was working with the government.
It was government work. This would have been right
before. This would have been during, oh my
goodness, he was president before Lázaro
Cárdenas. It would have been right before Lázaro
Cárdenas. I don't know. My husband could tell you,
but I couldn't. I can't remember his name either.
So anyway, Daddy was going back to Guerrero. So he
sent a wire to the hotel where we were staying. Was
this Guerrero-Tamalipas or Guerrero-Guerrero?
Instead of Guerrero. Right, okay. In
Chilpancingo. Oh, mm-hmm. I've been there. And so
Daddy sent his wire to Renato. And he was going by
train, and this is the way he worded the wire. going
through Monterey, I would like to see my daughter.
My daughter? In other words, you can stay in the
hotel.
He was very, very extremely jealous. But then
afterwards he realized that Renata was a good
husband, a good provider, and a A good man. And you
say your husband is a customs broker? Yes. He's a
forwarding agent.
Well, let's see. One more question. How do you feel
about the revolution now, looking at it? Do you
think it has been a good thing for Mexico or bad? Or
what? Oh, it definitely has been a good thing for
Mexico. I think revolutions, well-meant
revolutions, are always for the best. And even
though Don Porfirio Diaz was such a wonderful man
and everything else, he did keep the people of
Mexico in a tremendous ignorance. It was very
hard. He didn't do it because he didn't want them to
be educated, but it was too much of a, too big a
project. And the difference in classes in those
years I imagine must have been tremendous. Do you
feel like this has, as far as classes are
concerned, that Mexico has changed? I think so. I
think so. Servants used to be, if not mistreated,
in some cases, yes, they were. But they were looked
upon as, she's just my servant. Now you don't dare
do it, because if you do, you'll be without one.
Yeah. And they have the right, in other words, now
they can speak. But it's still so much more
evident. The class system is so much more evident
in Mexico than here.
At least I've found it so. You haven't been in
Mexico. I've been in Mexico enough to see a great,
great difference between the way people act and
say the way they would act in another part of the
United States, I find it very, very evident. I
really do. Just look at the other side, all of them.
It's... Well, they live the way they live because
they have a means of it.
Yes, but still... The means doesn't always give
you the right to look down. I don't think you can
look down anymore. Maybe not consciously put. Not
Luisa. All right, maybe not the Luisa foot. I still
find it. I mean, I still notice it. Hello? Dr.
Nolan, this is my husband. How do you do? How do you
do? That's so nice to meet you. This is her
daughter, Mary Catherine. Hello there. Hi. How
are you doing? Where are you going? She's going to
Rio. Good day. Good night. Oh, I'm keeping you.
Better get on down the road. This has been... What
do you think of the revolution, Mr. Zapata? Oh, the
revolution has brought tremendous progress for
Mexico. You compare Mexico today with Mexico 40
years ago, there's a tremendous difference. You
see, for instance, the city of Mexico City, you
know, when Porfirio Diaz left, the population was
300,000 people. No, no, but let's say about
500,000. The population now is about 11 million.
Monterey, the population of Monterey was 70,000.
Now it's close to a million and a half. The
population of Mexico as a whole was 13 million. Now
it's 55 million people. Well, but that's not due
to... Well, it's the province, you know. That's
due to something else. No, no, no. It is a
tremendous province, not only... All right,
well, better medical care. Economically. But
Senior Doug told a joke last night. He's very, very
quiet, but nevertheless, we're leaving the
Cardinals. We went to a cocktail of the Cardinals,
the consulate, American Council had, and
somebody made a joke about so many children, very
good Catholics. He says, well, no, there was the
one that they asked him, how many children do you
have? Well, we have seven. You must be Catholics.
No, we're Baptists. So what was the answer? Well,
you must be very Catholic. Passionate baptism.
That's an interesting way of putting it. Well,
I've noticed the changes. I was first in Mexico in
1955. I lived in Mexico City for seven weeks. I met
my husband on that student trip to learn Spanish.
Didn't learn much Spanish, but I did get a husband
out of it. Oh, yeah, eventually, two years later.
And we've been going back ever since. And we've
actually, well, we lived in Monterey three
months, one summer, and in Urapan three months,
two summers ago, and have traveled over fairly
long periods of time. So we've been watching the
changes. That's a very interesting
incident about, not incident, but during the time
that right after , she had lived in, It's Uruapan.
Uruapan. Uruapan. Uruapan. Uruapan. And so
there's Uruapan and what is the name of the...
Well, Zakan was the little name. Zakan. Zakan. But
she says that most of the... About what percentage
of the population doesn't speak Spanish? Oh.
Well, the one where they don't speak Spanish is
Angahuan. And I would say probably about... Oh, a
third to half of them don't speak Spanish. This is
predominantly the women. But then 30 years ago,
hardly anyone spoke Spanish. And still, Tarasco.
Tarasco. Tarasco Indians. Do you know the history
of the Tarasco Indians? Yeah, some.
Vasco de Quiroga. He was the one that organized the
Indians.
He was quite a remarkable man. He's very highly
respected in Michoacan.
But her knowledge of Mexico is very, very
interesting.
Your wife got me talking about my dissertation,
and that's dangerous. When I do that, I can't show
you. That fell into the revolutionary hands, you
know. Old Guerrero was the first one? How did that
happen? Well, it just happened, you know, that the
Collector of Customs was very close to Don
Francisco Madero, who was the president, was
assassinated. Mm-hmm. As collector of customs,
you know, he organized an uprising in the old town,
you know, fell into the hands of the
revolutionaries. And he was the
commander-in-chief of that particular group. So
the federalists, you know, what they used to call
it, They were never able to recapture the town, you
know. And so through Guerrero, you know, the
rebels, they imported everything, you know,
ammunition. Oh, that's very interesting. Yes, it
was one of their key—this was in the uprising
against Huerta. Mm-hmm. Well, what about—had
your family already left Guerrero? Well, we left
for a little while, you know, about two years. We
moved from Guerrero to Zapata. When was that? When
that particular time, you know. Oh, at that
particular time. So we went back to the old town and
we stayed most of the time, you know, spent most of
the revolution there. In Guerrero? In Guerrero.
Because there were no, no, there were no battles
there. No. It was a quiet... But it was already held
by the Caranzistas. The Caranzistas, you know,
about two or three years later, they organized an
army from Nuevo Laredo. They tried to recapture
the town, you know, but the Federales were
defeated. And later on, you know, the rebels, they
captured Nuevo Laredo. No regular particular
time. It was a small, very small population. It was
probably about 13,000.
Well, you can judge the progress of Mexico, you
know, by just looking at the size of the cities. And
a lot of other things. Don't you believe also that a
lot of the people who live in the country, so to
speak, I mean in places where, remote places, were
not accounted for? Oh, you mean before? I mean in
taking census. Earlier? Yes. This is entirely
possible. But there has been... They don't have
any means to know exactly. You can see the progress
too in the villages where people have electricity
and they have used it to establish, you know,
crafts of course are lovely but they have now small
local industries that bring in more return and you
can see it in housing and in sanitation and all
kinds of other things all through many of the
villages. Highways, you know. And in this
education. This is the thing that impresses me
most, is the knowledge that children and
grandchildren of people who not only were peasant
farmers, but who were linguistic Indians, are now
university graduates. are well established in
the Mexican middle class. From one little town of a
thousand people, there have, in 28 years, that
town has produced 88 professionals. Every one of
whom had to leave town for further education at the
end of the sixth grade. Which, you know, there are a
lot of towns in Texas that don't have that record, I
don't think. You know, for the time, probably
already was published in the Reader's Digest, a
very interesting article about education in
Mexico. Probably you will remember that they
mentioned the fact that they were building a
school a day in Mexico. I believe that. They're
doing a lot. There's still a lot to be done, but
they're making quite an effort. And it's not just
the government can't do it all. The one town has
done it even with only six years of school. The
Indian town, that is the ones who are
psychologically Indian, they have the schools,
but they won't send their children. So you can't,
you know, education for two, to achieve when it's
available, apparently, from the towns I've
studied, it has to come from inside you. It's one
thing for the opportunity to be there, but you have
to be willing to take it and to desire to take it. At
least this is what I found in these little towns
that I was studying. And they varied in that some
towns were not only willing to, but eager to, and
succeeded in not actually accomplishing a great
deal. And others just either rejected the
opportunity or ignored it. Or, well, there were
both. There was just not paying much attention to
it. And there were some pounds like this. And then
there was the one pound that actually rejected
opportunity because it came from a larger society
that they resumed. So there's a lot of choice
involved with those people in town. Well, I have
one more question for you. When did you happen to
come to Laredo? Well, I came to Laredo, let us say,
about
1922. 1922. Always. Why? Well, I came to Nuevo
Laredo first, and then I moved to Laredo, Texas. In
those days, you know, there were no immigration
requirements. All you had to do is cross the
border. So it really didn't make much difference.
Now I started myself here in Laredo.
I've been here quite a time. She's from Nuevo
Laredo, too. Yeah, now she knows. She was not a
refugee, she was exiled. Well, that's true,
really, in this particular case. They exiled
themselves. They were self-exiled.
Most of the people, the revolution that came to the
United States, it was the best kind of people in
Mexico. The wealthy people, the poor people, they
didn't have to move. Some did. Some did. Yes.
Mostly just to get away from the turmoil. Yes.
let's say, exiled people were the best kind of
people, you know. The ones that fled during the
early stages, the refugees from the Madero and
then the first stages of the Karenciste
revolution were definitely this group. And it was
what I found is that the poorer people tended to
come later. And they were reacting to just the
years and years and years of warfare. Or many
Villistas, you know, a price was put on the head of a
lot of the men who had fought with Villa. And so
there are a lot of people who had fought with the
Villa armies and that fled, say, by 1916 or 1917 to
escape Carranza's government. So there was that
too. Carranza is considered one of the, he is the
creator of the New Mexico. Monero, you know, he
belonged to one of the wealthiest families in,
well, I think you're familiar with. So he honestly
believed, you know, that changing the president
of Mexico, everything was to be changed. But
unfortunately, he didn't make any changes. He
changed the figures of the personalities of the
government, but made no social changes. Carranza
is the one that changed, created the new
constitution, 1917 constitution. So it's
considered one of the main
person, you know, in the creation of the New
Mexico. You know, I saw the table where the
constitution, the new constitution was signed.
No, it was not. It was not a new constitution. What
was it? It was a table, a very rustic table, you
know. When the plan of Guadalupe was signed. Oh,
beyond the end of Guadalupe. All right, that I see
now belonged to an uncle of mine. Oh, it did? And he
had that table there, and that's where they all
met, Puebla and Saltillo. And here's Saltillo.
Yes, I've been there. It's a fascinating place.
And the table had the names. What was his name? Your
uncle's name? Oscar Garza, but her name was
Angela, last name. You were named after? Amaya.
You know Carranza, that particular time, he was
the governor of the state of Puebla. And when
Madero was assassinated, he assumed, you know,
the command of the revolution against Huerta. And
he was appointed the commander in chief. He was not
general, you know. the government state. As some
people have analyzed it since, there was some
feeling that a military man shouldn't become
president, and that's why Carranza called
himself first chief, so that he would be eligible
to be. This is what one historian I've read has
suggested as a possibility for his party. Well, he
was his civilian, you know. He maintained his
civilian status.
Carranza was very interesting. One of my
favorites, well, I've always liked Obregón. No.
No? You don't like Obregón? Why not? Oh, he was very
mean, you know. Was he really? Yeah. In your
opinion. Not in my opinion, you know. He
assassinated most of his friends, you know. He had
no heart whatsoever.
You know, so that you can have an idea, you know,
Obregón, was one of the signers, you know, on the
Constitution, because in Mexico there must be no
re-election. President's elected for six years,
and that's the end of it. And he was so ambitious
that he changed the Constitution. Yes, yes. He
used to be re-elected. That's the reason he was
killed. Yeah, he didn't survive it, did he? It was a
bad choice. What do you think of Lázaro Cárdenas?
Well, Lázaro Cárdenas was very... He was a good
president, nationalistic president.
Oh, you know, he's a folk hero in Michoacán. Oh,
they love him there. Oh, my goodness. They call it a
pita, pata. Yeah, he's... He had a very good
president, some very progressive. Cayus
Putarco, yes, Cayus was a very good president.
Then why do we have now? It's a matter of opinion,
you know. He's trying to change everything. At the
same time, you know, there's a turmoil.